/*
Title: Accounting and Financial Statements
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- Prepare a personal income statement for the past year, using the same format as Alice’s income statement in this chapter. Include all relevant categories of income and expenses. What does your income statement tell you about your current financial situation? For example, where does your income come from, and where does it go? Do you have a surplus of income over expenses? If, so what are you doing with the surplus? Do you have a deficit? What can you do about that? Which of your expenses has the greatest effect on your bottom line? What is the biggest expense? Which expenses would be easiest to reduce or eliminate? How else could you reduce expenses? Realistically, how could you increase your income? How would you like your income statement for the next year to look?
- Using the format for Alice’s cash flow statement, prepare your cash flow statement for the same one-year period. Include your cash flows from all sources in addition to your operating cash flows—the income and expenses that appear on your income statement. What, if any, were the cash flows from financing and the cash flows from investing? Which of your cash flows are recurring, and which are nonrecurring? What does your cash flow statement tell you about your current financial situation? If you wanted to increase your liquidity, what would you try to change about your cash flows?
- Now prepare a balance sheet, again based on Alice’s form. List all your assets, liabilities and debts, and your equity from all sources. What does the balance sheet show about your financial situation at this moment in time? What is your net worth? Do you have positive or negative net worth at this time, and what does that mean? To increase your liquidity, how would your balance sheet need to change? What would be the relationship between your cash flow statement and your budget?
- Read the CNNMoney.com article “How Much Are You Worth?” (October 3, 2003, by Les Christie, at http://money.cnn.com/2003/09/30/pf/millionaire/networth/), and use the data and calculator to determine your net worth. How does you net worth compare to that of other Americans in your age and income brackets?
- The Small Business Administration’s Personal Financial Statement combines features of an income statement and a balance sheet. You would fill out a similar form if you were applying for a personal or business loan at bank or mortgage lender. Go to http://www.sba.gov/sbaforms/sba413.pdf and compare and contrast the SBA form with the statements you have already created for this chapter’s exercises.

