/*
Title: Leaving a Job
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- What do you look for in a job? Record in My Notes or your personal finance journal the characteristics of a job that you value most when seeking a job and the characteristics that bother you the most or would cause you to consider leaving a job voluntarily. Take an online job satisfaction survey or collaborate with classmates to develop questions for a job satisfaction survey that you can administer to other students. What do you find are the top ten characteristics of a great job offering a lot of job satisfaction?
- View the list of “Red Light” reasons for leaving a job—reasons you should not use in a job interview in which you are asked why you left your last job—at http://www.career-advantage.net/Training/reasons_for_leaving_a_job.html. Have you ever cited one of those reasons as the reason you left your job? For each item on the list, brainstorm with classmates why it would be better not use it in a job interview. What does the item say about you as a worker or as an employee? What could you possibly do differently to prevent each “Red Light” item from being the reason you leave a job?
- Record in My Notes or your personal finance journal the outcome of every job you have held. For each job, have a column for listing your reason(s) for taking it and another column listing your reason(s) for leaving it. Also, note what you liked most and least about each job. Do you notice any patterns emerging in the data about your job history? Is there anything about those patterns that you would like to change?

