/*
Title: Shang Dynasty
layout: content
*/
With thousands of years of continuous history, China is one of the world's oldest civilizations. The written history of China can be found as early as the Shang Dynasty (c. 1700-1046 BC), although ancient historical texts such as the Records of the Grand Historian (ca. 100 BC) and Bamboo Annals assert the existence of a Xia Dynasty before the Shang. Much of Chinese culture, literature and philosophy further developed during the Zhou Dynasty (1045-256 BC).

About 1,500 B.C. China passed abruptly from the Neolithic state to a full bronze age, probably getting bronze-working technique from the Near East or Thailand, as the Chinese scholars claim. China received its first farm-yard poultry as the domesticated jungle fowl from the Malayan peninsula. (Ref. 222) The first historical dynasty, the Shang, was a powerful political regime controlling most of northern China, even though in actuality it was a loose confederation of clan domains, many little more than village settlements. Two of their six capitals, at Cheng-chou and An-Yang, have been excavated, the latter showing a Black Pottery Culture. The people were basically Chinese, but some think that the aristocratic, charioteer warrior leaders may have come from farther west in the steppes. They used compound bows and bronze weapons. Fortifications dating to 1,300 B.C. along the Yellow River have evidence of these same warrior bands who may have originated on the Iranian plateau and moved step by step from oasis to oasis, conquering the Neolithic societies in their way. This was an aristocratic age with a sharp cleavage between noble warriors and helpless peasants. A recent newspaper article reports that Chinese scientists have uncovered the remains of 1,000 slaves killed as human sacrifices near An-Yang. Supposedly these were sacrificed for funerals or to honor the ancestors of the nobility, all demonstrating the extreme cruelty and barbarity of the slave-owning nobility of this Shang Dynasty. The religion was a mixture of ancestor and nature worship and their script was ideographic and strictly Chinese. About 1,200 B.C. iron was used in its meteoric form and treated like a semi precious stone. It was often mounted in bronze fittings for ceremonial weapons.

 
