/*
Title: Individual or “Micro” Factors That Affect Financial Thinking
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- Use Flat World’s My Notes feature to start keeping a written record of observations and insights about your financial thinking and behavior. You may be surprised at what you discover. In the process, consider how information in this text specifically relates to your observations and insights. Reading this chapter, for example, identify and describe your current life stage. How does your current age or life stage affect your financial thinking and behavior? To what extent and in what ways does your financial thinking anticipate your next stage of life? What financial goals are you aware of that you have set? How are your current experiences informing your financial planning for the future?
- Continue your personal financial journal by describing how other micro factors, such as your present family structure, health, career choices, and other individual factors, are affecting your financial planning. The My Notes feature allows you to share given entries or to keep them private. You can save your notes. You also can highlight and right click on your notes to copy and paste them into a word document on your computer.
- Find the age range for your stage of life and read the advice at http://financialplan.about.com/od/moneybyageorlifestage/Money_and_Personal_Finance_by_Age_Life_Stage.htm. According to the articles on this page, what should be your top priorities in financial planning right now? Read the articles on the next life stage. How are your financial planning priorities likely to change?

