/*
Title: Systemic or “Macro” Factors That Affect Financial Thinking
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- Go to http://www.nber.org/cycles.html to see a chart published by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The chart shows business cycles in the United States and their durations between 1854 and 2001. What patterns and trends do you see in these historical data? Which years saw the longest recessions? How can you tell that the U.S. economy has tended to become more stable over the decades?
- Record in your personal financial journal or in My Notes the macroeconomic factors that are influencing your financial thinking and behavior today. What are some specific examples? How have large-scale economic changes or cycles, such as the economic recession of 2008–2009, affected your financial planning and decision making?
- How does the health of the economy affect your financial health? How healthy is the U.S. economy right now? On what measures do you base your judgments? How will your appreciation of the big picture help you in planning for your future?
- How do business cycles and the health of the economy affect the value of your labor? In terms of supply and demand, what are the optimal conditions in which to sell your labor? How might further education increase your mobility in the labor market (the value of your labor)?
- Brainstorm with others taking this course on effective personal financial strategies forprotecting against recession,hedging against inflation,mitigating the effects of deflation,taking realistic advantage of periods of expansion.
- protecting against recession,
- hedging against inflation,
- mitigating the effects of deflation,
- taking realistic advantage of periods of expansion.

