/*
Title: The Planning Process
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- Assess and summarize your current financial situation. What measures are you using to describe where you are? Your assessment should include an appreciation of your financial assets, debts, incomes, and expenses.
- Use the S.M.A.R.T. planning model and information in this section to evaluate Alice’s goals. Write your answers in your financial planning journal or My Notes and discuss your evaluations with classmates.Pay off student loanBuy a house and save for children’s educationAccumulate assetsRetireTravel around the world in a sailboat
- Pay off student loan
- Buy a house and save for children’s education
- Accumulate assets
- Retire
- Travel around the world in a sailboat
- Identify and prioritize your immediate, short-term, and long-term goals at this time in your life. Why will you need different strategies to achieve these goals? For each goal identify a range of alternatives for achieving it. How will you evaluate each alternative before making a decision?
- In your personal financial journal or My Notes record specific examples of your use of the following kinds of strategies in making financial decisions:Weigh costs and benefitsRespond to incentivesLearn from experienceAvoid a feared consequence or lossAvoid riskThrow caution to the windOn average, would you rate yourself as more of a rational than nonrational financial decision maker?
- Weigh costs and benefits
- Respond to incentives
- Learn from experience
- Avoid a feared consequence or loss
- Avoid risk
- Throw caution to the wind

