/*
Title: Measuring Return and Risk
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- Selecting a security to invest in, such as a stock or fund, requires analyzing its returns. You can view the annual returns as well as average returns over a five-, ten-, fifteen-, or twenty-year period. Charts of returns can show the amount of volatility in the short term and over the longer term. What do you need to know to calculate the annual rate of return for an investment? Consider that at the beginning of 2010 Ali invests $5,000 in a mutual fund. The fund has a gain in value of $200, but generates no income. What is the annual percentage rate of return? What do you need to know to estimate the expected return of an investment in the future? If the fund Ali invests in has an average fifteen-year annual return of 7 percent, what percentage rate of return should he expect for 2011? Find the estimated annualized rate of return for a hypothetical portfolio by using the calculator at http://www.mymoneyblog.com/estimate-your-portfolios-rate-of-return-calculator.html.
- Try the AARP’s investment return calculator at http://www.aarp.org/money/investing/investment_return_calculator/, experimenting with different figures to solve for a range of situations. Use the information on that page to answer the following questions. Can the future rate of return on an investment be estimated with any certainty? Do investments that pay higher rates of return carry higher volatility? Do investments that pay higher rates of return carry higher risk? What accounts for differences between the actual return and the expected return on an investment?
- The standard deviation on the rate of return on an investment is a measure of its volatility, or risk. What would a standard deviation of zero mean? What would a standard deviation of 10 percent mean?
- What kinds of risk are included in investment risk? Go online to survey current or recent financial news. Find and present a specific example of the impact of each type of investment risk. In each case, how did the type of risk affect investment performance?

