/*
Title: Intro to the AP test
layout: content
*/

##Exam Information

The AP World History Exam is 3 hours and 5 minutes long and includes both a 55-minute multiple-choice section and a 130-minute free-response section. The multiple-choice section of the examination accounts for half of the student's exam score, and the free-response section for the other half. The DBQ time includes a 10 minute reading period. 

Question Type   |      Number of Questions    |     Timing

	 Multiple-choice			 |	70 questions|	55 minutes
	 Document-based question	 |	1 question	|	50 minutes 
	 Continuity/change-over-time |	1 question	|	40 minutes
	 Comparative essay			 |	1 question	|	40 minutes

##Multiple-Choice Section
Section I consists of 70 multiple-choice questions designed to measure the student's knowledge of world history from Period 1 to the present. This section follows the percentages listed below; questions will draw from individual or multiple periods: 

###Period Weights

1. Technological and Environmental Transformations	to c.600 B.C.E.	**5%**
2. Organization and Reorganization of Human Societies	c. 600 B.C.E. to c. 600 C.E.	**15%**
3. Regional and Transregional Interactions	c. 600 C.E. to c.1450		**20%**
4. Global Interactions	c. 1450 to c. 1750								**20%**
5. Industrialization and Global Integration	c. 1750 to c. 1900			**20%**
6. Accelerating Global Change and Realignments	c. 1900 to Present		**20%**
Multiple-choice questions will also measure various geographical regions, with no more than 20 percent of multiple-choice questions focusing solely on Europe. 

##Free-Response Section
In Section II, the free-response section of the exam, Part A begins with a mandatory 10-minute reading period for the document-based question. Students should answer the document-based question in approximately 40 minutes. 

In Part B students are asked to answer a question that deals with continuity and change over time (covering at least one of the periods in the concept outline). Students will have 40 minutes to answer this question, 5 minutes of which should be spent planning and/or outlining the answer. 

In Part C students are asked to answer a comparative question that will focus on broad issues or themes in world history and deal with at least two societies. Students will have 40 minutes to answer this question, 5 minutes of which should be spent planning and/or outlining the answer. 

