/*
Title: Diversification: Return with Less Risk
layout: questions
*/

## Exercises

- What is the meaning of the expressions “don’t count your chickens before they hatch” and “don’t put all your eggs in one basket”? How do these expressions relate to the challenge of reducing exposure to investment risks and building a high-performance investment portfolio? View ING’s presentation and graph on diversification and listen to the audio at http://www.ingdelivers.com/pointers/diversification. In the example, how does diversification lower risk? Which business sectors would you choose to invest in for a diversified portfolio?
- Draft a provisional portfolio strategy. In My Notes or your personal finance journal, describe your capital allocation decisions. Then identify the asset classes you are thinking of investing in. Describe how you might allocate assets to diversify your portfolio. Draw a pie chart showing your asset allocation. Draw another pie chart to show how life cycle investing might affect your asset allocation decisions in the future. How might you use the strategy of market timing in changing your asset allocation decisions? Next, outline the steps you would take to select specific securities. How would you know which stocks, bonds, or funds to invest in? How are index funds useful as an alternative to security selection? What are the advantages and disadvantages of investing in an index fund such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average? (Go to http://money.cnn.com/data/markets/dow/ to find out.)
- Do you favor an active or a passive investment management strategy? Why? Identify all the pros and cons of these investment strategies and debate them with classmates. What factors favor an active approach? What factors favor a passive approach? Which strategy might prove more beneficial for first-time investors?
- View the online video blog “3 Keys to Investing” at http://www.allbusiness.com/personal-finance/4968227-1.html. What advice does the speaker, Miranda Marquit (October 26, 2007), have for novice investors? According to this source, what are the three keys to successful investing?

